Once around Barnard's Loop.
So Barnard's Loop is an enormous
structure in the sky in the
constellation of Orion. It's listed in
the Sharpless catalog of H2 regions of
ionized hydrogen forming nebula and gets
the catalog number SH2-276.
So, I've drawn Orion over there on the
right hand side with the Orion Nebula
ringed in red there at M42. But it's not
the Orion Nebula we're talking about.
We're talking about the photograph on
the left and the enormous loop that goes
from above Orion's belt all the way
curving round to the left down towards
the region between the two stars at the
bottom of Orion there, Safe and Riel.
Lovely picture.
So first observed very early on actually
by uh ancient observers but it was EE
Barnard who was the first to put it in a
catalog and hence it's called Barnard's
Loop and this is a drawing from uh the
publication Popular Astronomy um in
1894.
So it goes way back and you can see
Barnard's Loop outlined there in the
rendition. It's uh not the best
photograph. Um it's actually a drawing
and it's quite amazing that it's really
quite accurate. So it's part of the
Orion molecular cloud. Again, lovely
picture of it looping from above the
belt round to the central lower part of
Orion. There we've got Riel at the top
left. We've got the belt stars in the
middle of Alnitac, Al-Nam, and Minta.
We've got Riel at the bottom right.
You've got the sword handle with the uh
famous Orion Nebula in the middle there.
You've got the Witch Head Nebula, the
white streak down to the lower right um
being lit up by the power of Riel there.
And this image was astronomy picture of
the day published on the NASA website
back in 2010. It's uh amazing and you
can see the author's name there. I think
it's uh so good he needs an individual
credit for that one.
So
looking at it, it's huge, covering 10
degrees of sky all the way down the left
hand side of Orion.
You can see it in perfect conditions.
Clearly Barnard was able to spot it, but
a camera with a long exposure is really
what you need. A telescope will be no
help at all because a telescope will
have such a tiny field of view that you
just won't be able to tell what you're
looking at. For this, you need a camera
with a really quite short focal length
lens, maybe 50 millimeters, maybe 28
millimeters. Crank it wide open and do a
time exposure. And you should pick up
all of these features in this
photograph. Um, and if you can do a
whole series of them and stack them
together, perhaps you may be able to get
a picture as good as this just with a
camera, it's a very well worthwhile te
for amateur astronomers.
It's about 1,400 light years away.
That's roughly the same distance of a
lot of the objects in and around Orion.
In fact, 1,400 to,600. It's somewhat
tricky to measure the distance to these
nebula. You tend to have to find objects
that you know are embedded in them and
measure the distance to those. And for a
Barnard's Loop, that's a particular
challenge. and 1,400 lighty years away,
360 light years long in that semicircle
that we're looking at in the photograph
there.
So, physically, it's an emission nebula.
It's hydrogen gas that is being ionized
by ultraviolet light coming from the hot
bright stars in the core of Orion's
nebula.
The ultraviolet hits the atoms, excites
the electrons into high energy states
and then as they cascade down the energy
levels, they give off characteristic
wavelengths of light. And the one that
we see as the pink color there is the
hydrogen alpha line at 656.28
nanometers and it's part of the series
of lines. There are there's other ones
in the uh turquoise color, the blue, and
into the violet. And they get closer and
closer together in a very predictable
characteristic way that quantum
mechanics can explain uh extremely
accurately.
A lovely high contrast picture here
taken by an amateur astronomer and it's
uh enhanced the red so we can see the
hydrogen gas. You've got the bright
yellow white bit of the Orion Nebula in
the middle. Lots of the glowing hydrogen
Barnard's Loop and then Lambda Orionus
up at the top. And there will be a
separate video about Lambda Orion
coming. So, what do we think is going on
here? Well, what we believe is that
there was a supernova explosion about 2
million years ago in the Orion Nebula
region. And the animation on the right
here is an attempt to show what a
supernova would look like. It's an
animation of the Crab Nebula. It's
somewhat cheating, but it gives you the
idea of this expanding shock wave. And
that's what we're seeing two million
years down the road as Barnard's loop.
And we think that supernova also created
a number of runaway stars. And I have a
video called runaway stars that talks
about them. There are three stars in
particular, AE or Mu Colombi and 53
Aratus that we think are traveling away
from this explosion, hurled out by the
violence of it. They were all once part
of a cluster formed in and around Iota
Orionis. And one of the members of that
grouping blew up 2 million years ago
created Barnard's loop and sent the
material hurtling outwards and caused
these stars to become runaways charging
away in different directions that all
point back to this explosion.
So 1,400 light years away now 2 million
years ago the distance would have been
slightly different and there is
considerable evidence on the earth that
we did suffer a
side effects of a nearby supernova about
2.5 million years ago. Was this the one?
We're not sure. It may have been, it may
not be. The dating on these things is a
little bit variable. So, it's quite hard
to be certain. Um, as is always the
case, measuring things is hard. Um, but
you can stitch a a story together around
it that seems plausible at least. The
reason that we think this supernova
occurred is we find
in the sediments in the bottom of the
ocean and in the bottom of Lake Tangana.
You dig down through them and you take a
core and you know the age of the core at
different layers and we find that at
around that 2.5 million years ago there
is a layer containing radioisotope
markers from the iron 60 that is the
radioactive form of iron that is
prevalent in these sorts of exploding
stars and I felt this was so important I
did a whole separate uh story about it
so there's a video on that called did a
to nearby supernova trigger a burst of
rapid evolution because there's quite a
lot more to that story. So possibly all
associated
with Barnard's loop. So again, another
picture of Barnard's Loop and just some
other objects in and around that area.
Right in the center there by uh we have
Orion, the Orion Nebula looking fairly
white. And above it around the star at
the left of the trio of Orion's belt,
that's the star Al-Nitac, you have the
glowing hydrogen with the flame nebula
just to the slight right and sorry,
slight left of Alnitac and slightly
higher. And then on the right and lower,
you have the ridge of glowing hydrogen
with that dark finger of dirty material
creating the Horsehead Nebula. Maybe
I'll do a whole separate edition about
the Horsehead Nebula. And I did mention
there is going to be a talk about Lambda
Orioness when I finally finish it.
So-called angelf fish nebula up at the
top of Orion, another possible
supernova. So look out for that one.
And just finally to finish off about
Barnard's Loop, I do like to look for
mentions of these things in sci-fi. And
this one's particularly favorite of
mine. This is an image from Elite
Dangerous. Um the Elite
computer game written by a friend of
mine by Frontier uh which is owned by uh
David Braben who I've known for nearly
40 years and uh Barnard's Loop is part
of the Elite Dangerous game. So a plug
for Elite there. So thanks very much for
listening and I'll leave it there and do
look out for those other videos that
I've mentioned. Bye for now.